## Abstract
Fatigue is a pervasive problem in first responder occupations, potentially leading to acute effects (e.g. work performance, increased accident risk) and long-term outcomes (e.g., precursor to musculoskeletal disorders, cardiovascular disease, mental health disorders). Reducing and managing fatigue is essential to protect both the first responder and the public they serve. In Canada, a national occupational standard on fatigue risk management is being developed for first responders, an umbrella term of police, firefighters, and paramedics/EMS personnel. We conducted a scoping review of peer-reviewed literature, to examine how fatigue has been conceptualized within each of the three occupations, and to identify differences or similarities based on types of risk factors and outcomes, that should be accounted for in a standard for first responders. We found that the distribution of papers based on the type of fatigue, risk factors, and outcomes differed between occupations. There were stronger similarities in the distribution of outcome types between police and firefighting; physical outcomes were the main focus in all three occupations. Of the papers that describe the link between risk factor, fatigue, and outcome, we found that burnout, cognitive fatigue, and physical fatigue were associated with adverse health and performance outcomes. We recommend that a fatigue risk management standard for first responders should consider managing fatigue of any type and include both workplace and personal/social/ cultural risk factors to prevent both short- and longer-term outcomes.

## 1. Introduction
First responders are at high risk of suffering from decrements in neurocognitive and physical performance related to fatigue (Bentley and Levine, 2016; Young et al., 2014; Gershon et al., 2002). First responders refer to a heterogenous grouping of highly specialized paid professionals and volunteers, typically within police, firefighting, and paramedic/ emergency medical service (EMS) occupations, who are on the front line to serve and protect lives and property (Haugen et al., 2012). These occupations are highly demanding; responders are exposed to both physical and psychological stressors (Haugen et al., 2012; Carleton et al., 2017; Carleton et al., 2018). Fatigue has generally been described as a multidimensional construct, affecting the overall state of the whole organism, and is associated with physical, psychological, socioeconomic, and environmental factors (Saito, 1999). Performance decrements due to fatigue endanger not only the personal health and safety of first responders but also the health and safety of their fellow responders and the public (Ramey et al., 2019). Fatigue may also be a precursor to adverse longer-term outcomes, having been linked to increased risk of developing musculoskeletal disorders (Armstrong et al., 1993), cardiovascular disease (Collins, 2009), and mental health disorders (Hardy et al., 1997). Reducing and managing fatigue and mitigating its associated health and safety risks are therefore essential to protect both the first responder and the public they serve. In response to the risk and outcomes of fatigue, first responder organizations and the research community have dedicated their efforts to manage fatigue through development of risk assessment tools and controls, including fatigue-proofing strategies, policies, standards, guidelines, and programs. These efforts may be collectively implemented as part of a fatigue risk management system framework, which is a science- * Corresponding author at: Canadian Institute for Safety, Wellness, & Performance, School of Business, Conestoga College Institute of Technology & Advanced Learning, 299 Doon Valley Drive, Kitchener, Ontario N2G 4M4, Canada. E-mail address: myung@conestogac.on.ca (M. Yung). M. Yung et al. based, data driven process that is subjected to continuous improvement, and designed to improve organizational and personal outcomes (Lerman et al., 2012). When incorporated into an organization ' s management system, risk management elements are linked into a formal structure (Yazdani et al., 2015). There has been a surge in developing and investigating the effectiveness of fatigue risk management elements and programs individually in law enforcement, firefighting, and paramedics/EMS. Barger et al. (2017) conducted a station-level randomized trial of a fatigue risk management program for urban firefighters, with a focus on policies to improve the quality and duration of sleep. Firefighters assigned to the fatigue risk management group reported significantly improved sleep quality and increased sleep at the fire station. A fatigue management training program developed for the Royal Canadian Mounted Police improved sleep satisfaction, reduced symptoms of insomnia, and reduced incidence of headaches (James et al., 2018). Studies have also focused on law enforcement policies and practices, including shift scheduling and work hours (Vila et al., 2002). More recently, an evidence-informed guideline for fatigue risk management system is under development for emergency service personnel in the United States (US) (Patterson et al., 2018). In Canada, a national occupational standard is being developed to promulgate these ideas into workplace practices and policies. The proposed national occupational standard is intended to be integrated into existing management systems, irrespective of the distinct occupation (i. e., paramedics/EMS, police, firefighting), but rather an aggregate first responder grouping. Paramedics/EMS, firefighters, and police officers have been naturally grouped as first responders, in due part to similar inherent risks to their health and safety, similar organizational rank structure, and the possibility that many responders belong and concurrently work in more than one occupational role (e.g., full-time paramedic/EMS personnel working as a volunteer firefighter) (Stanley et al., 2016). Grouping police, paramedic/EMS, and firefighting occupations as first responders have been used when studying mental disorder symptoms (Carleton et al., 2018), suicidal thoughts and behaviours (Stanley et al., 2016), and chronic pain (Carleton et al., 2017). The grouped umbrella term of first responders have also been used when developing and implementing evidence-based national recommendations for post-traumatic stress disorder (Haugen et al., 2012; Oliphant, 2016), communication systems (Huang et al., 2007), and emergency response coordination (Anderson et al., 2004) within management systems. The proposed evidence-informed, consensus-based fatigue risk management standard will be constructed with help from a systematic scoping review of peer-reviewed literature, an environmental scan of grey literature, and semi-structured key informant interviews. However, before developing a standard for first responders, we examine how fatigue has been conceptualized within the three occupations and identify any occupational-level differences and similarities. Our objective is to report on a scoping review that broadly identifies relevant research pertaining to fatigue in first responder literature, including a cursory analysis for each occupational group, and possible linkages between risk factors, fatigue, and outcomes. Together, the cursory analysis and linkages will help define how fatigue has been conceptualized, types of potential risk factors, and types of potential outcomes that should be accounted for in a fatigue risk management standard for first responders. The results of this study will be used to support the development of a national standard in Canada.

## 2. Methods
Scoping reviews follow a methodology that is equivalent to qualitative analysis of literature to itemize and summarize existing findings on a topic; to understand topics, research designs, and how issues are approached by researchers; to facilitate an in-depth understanding of how findings relate to each other and to the research question; and to examine complex areas of research that have not been reviewed comprehensively (Arksey and O ' Malley, 2005; Levac et al., 2010; Poth and Ross, 2009). Although scoping reviews involve a transparent and systematic search and data extraction approach, a scoping review does not assess the effectiveness of an intervention nor the quality of the literature (Arksey and O ' Malley, 2005; Levac et al., 2010). Scoping reviews have been used to map existing research by providing descriptive results rather than definitive findings on the effectiveness of programs or interventions, such as work disability policies (e.g., MacEachen et al., 2017), and the design of ambulances and their equipment (Du et al., 2020). The review was guided by identifying relevant research pertaining to elements of the risk assessment RACE model (i.e., recognize hazards, assess risks, implement controls, and evaluate effectiveness of controls), which is a known process in dealing with workplace hazards and are components of a fatigue risk management system. We anticipate greater nuanced differences between occupations based on RACE elements. We asked the following research questions: 1. In Paramedic/EMS, Firefighting, and Police work, what are the potential health, wellbeing, and performance outcomes of fatigue? 2. In Paramedic/EMS, Firefighting, and Police work, what are the potential risk factors leading to these potential outcomes associated with fatigue? 3. In Paramedic/EMS, Firefighting, and Police work, how do organizations and responders identify hazards of fatigue and assess the risk of an adverse outcome? 4. In Paramedic/EMS, Firefighting, and Police work, what are valid and reliable instruments for measuring or detecting fatigue among responders? 5. In Paramedic/EMS, Firefighting, and Police work, what control actions or interventions are available to reduce fatigue? In this paper, we provide descriptive results of the scoping review, to understand how fatigue is being researched in the three first responder occupations, and address questions 1 and 2.

### 2.1. Identifying relevant studies
We conducted a systematic search of peer-reviewed literature using three large databases: PubMed, Scopus, and Embase. After consulting with a research librarian, we developed a list of relevant search terms within three core concepts (person/subject, task/discipline/subject area, fatigue/health outcome/effect) and their synonyms, including keywords and phrases as well as database-specific subject headings (MeSH and Emtree terms). We used the Boolean operator ' OR ' between search terms within each concept, and Boolean operator ' AND ' across concepts. The systematic search focused on articles from 1990 to May 2, 2019. The starting year was selected to coincide with the US National Transportation Safety Board ' s Most Wanted List (NTSB, 2020) of top safety needs and issues for improvement to prevent accidents and minimize injuries and fatalities; fatigue has been a prioritized occupational issue since 1990. The transportation industry has long recognized the effect of fatigue on work performance and is an early adopter of fatigue risk management systems (Lerman et al., 2012); the 1990 starting year allows us to include literature when occupational researchers may have focused on the effects of fatigue and aspects of the RACE model. We predetermined a list of 10 relevant articles, including those described in the introduction focused on fatigue risk management programs, to crossreference with the search results. We excluded articles that were not written in English or were not published in peer-reviewed journals.

### 2.2. Study selection & title and abstract screening
Papers obtained from our systematic search went through two c Table 1 Categories and definitions of second screen to extract from full-text reviews. | Extraction | Categories | Definition or Examples | |----------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------| | Study Information | | Title, Authors, Pub. Yr., Journal, Sample Size, Occupation (Paramedic/EMS, Firefighter, Police Officer), Mean Age of Sample, Mean Experience of Sample in Yrs., Sex (%M;%F), Region/Country of Sample, Study Design (experimental, quasi-exp., survey, observational, commentary, review), Measurement Strategy (cross-sectional, prospective cohort, case-control, longitudinal, parallel, cross-over), and Sampling Method (randomized, non-randomized, matched) [Study Design Categories from Aguayo et al., 2017]. | | Type of Fatigue | Cognitive Fatigue | Involves decrements in human information processing capability due to mental workload. It is an executive failure leading to competency, productivity, and error avoidance (Techera et al., 2016). We include aspects of sleepiness, sleep quality/duration, arousal, attention, alertness, and both cognitive overload and underload theories of fatigue. | | | Physical Fatigue | Inability to maintain physical performance and can be attributed to metabolic disturbances, failure of neuromuscular transmission, changes that affect the myosin-actin complex. We include tiredness or exhaustion involving the cardiovascular system, reduction in strength capability, changes in motor control, and reduced proprioception (V ø llestad, 1997; Gates and Dingwell, 2008; Bj ̈ orklund et al., 2000). | | | Burnout | A psychological response to work stress and is defined by three dimensions: exhaustion, cynicism, and professional inefficiency (Maslach and Leiter, 2016). Burnout is cumulative stress from demands of daily life and from prolonged high levels of stress; compassion fatigue is closely related and may be considered a form of burnout. | | | Emotional Fatigue | Includes compassion fatigue, which is the emotional, physical, and cognitive stresses resulting from exposure to a traumatized individual rather than from the exposure to the trauma itself (Figley, 1995). Characterized by exhaustion, anger and irritability, the lack of sympathy and empathy, reduced sense of enjoyment or satisfaction with work, increased absenteeism, and the impaired ability to make decisions (Cocker and Joss, 2016). | | Types of Risk Factors | Work Organization Physical Environ. Personal/Social/Cultural Task | Scheduling, work arrangement, management style, organizational behavior, safety climate/culture, programs, work hours, job demands etc. Tools, equipment, PPE, workstation layout, physical hazards (noise, sound, light), etc. Personal capacity, demographics, anthropometrics, interactions with people outside of workplace, work/life balance, societal roles Repetition, force, duration, posture, vibration. | | Type of Fatigue Outcome | Performance | Includes (1) Quality - metrics: # % or frequency of quality deficiencies, human error rate, (2) Productivity - concept that measures the ratio of outputs to inputs (Munnell, 1990) or (3) Anything related to successful execution of task. | | | Physical Health | Musculoskeletal, acute injuries (trips, slips, accidents, falls), adverse longer-term outcomes (chronic diseases, cardiovascular disease, illnesses, cancer, immune deficiencies, etc.) | | Type of Interventions (Not Reported in this Paper) | Wellness/MentalHealth Training PPE Administrative Engineering | Depression, emotional, job satisfaction, stress, spiritual, enrichment, attitude toward work, conflict, burdens, financial, intellectual, social Capacity tests, performance training, training to perform tasks (e.g., lifting, movement, etc.), prevention programs. Wearable to prevent fatigue (like a garment). Includes insoles, type of shoes, eyewear (visual strain). Not PPE or wearable for the job to reduce exposure to other work exposures. Workplace scheduling, rest breaks, restricted work hours per day or week. Specific to mitigate or reduce fatigue, could be a new intervention device or study that evaluates the effectiveness of different types of engineering controls. | | | Not Sure/Elimination or Substitution | Not specific to a category. Could be a mix of interventions. Could be elimination or substitution methods. | M. Yung et al. M. Yung et al. screening processes: (1) Title and abstract screening, and (2) full-text review and data extraction.

## 3. Results
For the first screen, we created a screening tool to assist in selecting articles for inclusion based on title and abstract, retaining articles that involved a first responder occupation. Here, Paramedic/EMS included EMT, EMS Personnel, EMT Personnel, Ambulance Worker, Ambulance Driver, and Paramedic Trainees. Firefighter included Fireman, Ladderman, and Firefighter Trainees. Police Officer included Policeman, Officer, Cop, Constable, Law Enforcement, and Police Trainees. We also retained articles that involved aspects of the RACE model for fatigue. We filtered out articles on single events (e.g., plane crashes, natural disasters, terrorist attacks), those that did not focus on civilian first responders (e. g., wildland firefighters, military police, border police or patrol, correction officers, intelligence officers), those that involved air ambulances, and those that did not focus on worker fatigue (e.g., material fatigue). Titles and abstracts were screened by two reviewers. The first 60 titles and abstracts were screened by both reviewers independently and then evaluated for inter-rater agreement. Cohen ' s unweighted kappa was calculated to determine the level of agreement between the two reviewers; the strength of agreement was ' Very Good ' (k = 0.859, z = 6.67, p < 0.05). With this level of agreement, each reviewer independently screened the remaining articles. After both reviewers completed the first screen, any discrepant results were discussed until consensus was reached. All papers for the data gathering and extraction process was retained within a publicly available online tool (Rayyan; Ouzzani et al., 2016).

### 2.3. Charting the data
In the second screen, the retained articles underwent a full-text review where key data was extracted using Microsoft Excel. From the fulltext review, we extracted high-level information (e.g., authors, year of publication, journal, type of study, world region or country of study sample, and categorization of first responder occupation), detailed information (e.g., objective of the study, the sample size, sample characteristics -age, work experience in years, sex), and the type of fatigue (we indicate here the details of experimental protocols or methods, or the prevalence of fatigue). We broadly categorized fatigue as: (1) cognitive, (2) physical, (3) burnout, (4) emotional, and (5) perceptual (Table 1). These types of fatigue have been described in Grandjean, 1979; Saito, 1999; Yung et al., 2020. The type of fatigue was determined by evaluating three criteria: (1) the type of fatigue described by the study authors, (2) the measurement tools (if available), and (3) the task or risk factors that may be attributed to the fatigue response. In our scoping review, we also retained detailed information pertaining to hazards and risk factors, fatigue measurement and risk assessment tools, fatigue outcomes, outcome measurement tools, and interventions and risk mitigation strategies based on the hierarchy of controls (Table 1). In this paper we report findings from types of risk factors and types of fatigue outcomes. Risk factors and outcomes were categorized into groupings based on established human factors and ergonomics systems models (ISO, 2016). Two reviewers extracted data from the full-text review. The first 20 articles were extracted by both reviewers to ensure quality of the retained data. Both reviewers consulted with one another, throughout the entire second screening process, if there were any uncertainties with interpreting articles.

### 2.4. Relationship between risk factors, fatigue, and outcomes
Articles providing both a fatigue effect (i.e., quantified from fatigue measurement or risk assessment) and an outcome response (i.e., measure of performance, physical health, or mental health or wellbeing) were extracted from articles retained after full-text review. We identified and mapped elements of the types of fatigue risk factors, type of fatigue, type of outcomes, and the effects (association or relationship) between these elements. Our search resulted in a total of 3671 papers and removed 1197 duplicates, leaving 2474 papers eligible for title and abstract review (first screen). A total of 507 papers remained after the first screen and were eligible for full-text review (second screen). We further excluded 104 papers, leaving 403 papers for full text data extraction (Fig. 1). Of the 403 articles (Fig. 2), a large proportion focused on fatigue among firefighters (38.7%) followed by police (33.3%), and paramedic/EMS personnel (22.8%). Twenty-one studies (5.2%) also described fatigue not specific to a single first responder occupation but involved more than one or all three occupations. For our cursory analysis, in order to better examine similarities and differences between research in the three occupations, we focused on articles investigating a single occupation. Of the 21 excluded articles, nine articles focused on cognitive fatigue, four on physical fatigue, five on burnout, one on emotional fatigue, and two on emotional fatigue and burnout. Among these excluded articles, US first responders were the main focus (9 articles), followed by Italian responders (3 articles), Greek and Polish responders (1 article each), and 7 articles on various or non-specific first responders around the world. Based on single-occupation articles, we found that most articles investigated fatigue, of any type, within US paramedic/EMS (30), firefighting (67), and police (54) populations (Figs. 3 -5). Articles focused on Canadian first responders were within the top five (13 paramedic/ EMS, 7 firefighting, 7 police), representing 14.1%, 4.5%, and 5.2% of total articles across all countries, respectively. From the total number of paramedic/EMS articles across all countries, 36 were devoted solely to cognitive fatigue (39.1% of all fatigue types and combination of types), 24 to physical fatigue (26.1%), and 22 to burnout (23.9%). The proportions in Canadian paramedic/EMS research were dissimilar, with 7.7% focused exclusively on cognitive fatigue, 46.2% to physical fatigue, and 38.5% to burnout. These differences in proportion of research were observed with firefighting research, where globally, 66% of research was dedicated to physical fatigue, 19.9% on cognitive fatigue, and 5.1% on burnout; most of Canadian research focused on physical fatigue. Lastly, in both global and Canadian police research, the majority of articles examined cognitive fatigue (56.7% and 42.9%, respectively). In Canada, cognitive fatigue was followed by physical fatigue (28.6%) then burnout (14.3%); among articles across all countries, cognitive fatigue was followed by burnout (19.4%) then physical fatigue (11.2%). Within each occupation, we examined how fatigue has been conceptualized, their fatigue-related risk factors, and fatigue-related outcomes. We organized combinations of multiple fatigue types, risk factors, or outcomes into a single category ( ' more than one ' ) and also account for each type into their respective independent grouping. Therefore, we report article counts, rather than proportions (Table 2). Cognitive fatigue was most represented in paramedic/EMS research; 45 articles were devoted to this topic followed by physical fatigue and burnout. In firefighting research, the majority focused on physical fatigue (116 articles) followed by cognitive fatigue. Eighty-eight police articles were categorized as cognitive fatigue, followed by burnout then physical fatigue. In paramedic/EMS research, risk factors were mainly personal/social/cultural and work organization sub-categories, while tasks and physical environment both represent half that number. We observed that in firefighting research, there was a consistent distribution of articles devoted to each of the risk factor types. In the police literature, work organization risk factors represented 47 of the 85 articles. We found that there was a consistent number of articles within outcome types from a total of 15 paramedic-focused articles. Physical health outcomes were a primary focus in firefighting literature. Among the police literature, a total of 43 articles had data on fatigue outcomes, where physical health outcomes were the primary focus. M. Yung et al.

### 3.1. Relationship between risk factors, fatigue, and outcomes
interview (n = 1) studies. Twenty-eight articles provided both a fatigue effect and an outcome response . We documented the risk factor type, the type of fatigue, and the outcome type. We also indicated whether the relationship or association between risk factor, fatigue, and outcome was null, negative, or positive. We excluded literature reviews or systematic reviews from analysis (n = 6). Retained were observational (prospective cohort [n = 2] or crosssectional [n = 15]), quasi-experimental (n = 4), and qualitative Four articles had available fatigue and outcome data among paramedic/EMS articles (Fig. 6). We identified six studies with fatigue and outcome data in firefighting literature (Fig. 7). There were 12 studies retained from the police literature (Fig. 8). Of the 22 retained articles, the majority (n = 15) were cross-sectional observational studies; therefore, we could not draw conclusions with regard to the direction of their reported relationships. Two studies were longitudinal designs: a three-year follow-up study on firefighters to M. Yung et al. M. Yung et al. Table 2 Number of articles for paramedics/EMS, firefighting, and police by types of fatigue type, risk factors, and outcomes. Articles counts are shown, as distributions into categories are not mutually independent (papers focusing on multiple types are also represented within each individual type, therefore summation of articles based on type exceeds total number of articles). | Extracted Element | Occupation | Type | | | | | | |------------------------------|-----------------|-------------------|----------------------|----------------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------| | Fatigue | | Cognitive | Physical | Burnout | Emotional | Perceptual | More Than One | | | Paramedics/ EMS | 45 | 30 | 27 | 1 | 0 | 10 | | | Firefighting | 42 | 116 | 8 | 1 | 3 | 13 | | | Police | 88 | 23 | 34 | 4 | 2 | 14 | | Fatigue-Related Risk Factors | | Work Organization | Physical Environment | Personal, Social, Cultural | Task | More Than One | | | | Paramedics/ EMS | 17 | 7 | 20 | 9 | 9 | | | | Firefighting | 20 | 26 | 30 | 21 | 16 | | | | Police | 47 | 8 | 36 | 6 | 11 | | | Fatigue-Related Outcomes | | Performance | Physical Health | Wellness/Mental Health | More Than One | | | | | Paramedics/ EMS | 6 | 7 | 6 | 3 | | | | | Firefighting | 4 | 31 | 5 | 3 | | | | | Police | 9 | 32 | 7 | 4 | | | investigate risk factors associated with mental and physical strain (Lusa et al., 2006) and a 12-day protocol of police officers monitoring sleepwake cycles and cardiovascular health (Yadav et al., 2016). Lusa et al. (2006) found that work-organizational and psychosocial factors were strongly associated with increased perceived work-related physical and mental strain. Unfair distribution of work tasks was a significant risk factor for perceived physical strain (odds ratio = 8.5, CI: 1.5 -49.6). Poor work ability due to musculoskeletal symptoms was strongly associated with physical strain (odds ratio = 5.6, CI: 2.2 -13.8). Yadav et al. (2016) measured the effect of chronotype, sleep quality, daytime sleepiness, and fatigue on heart rate and blood pressure, risk factors for CVD. Twenty-seven of 85 participants suffered poor sleep quality ( > 5 on the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index global scale), 9 participants suffered high daytime sleepiness, and 24 participants experienced high levels of fatigue. Yadav et al. (2016) found an increase in amplitude of heart rate among officers during ' out-of-phase ' duty schedules; out-of-phase duty schedules were associated with a sleep-wake cycle that was more fragmented, compromising sleep quality. Four studies were quasi-experimental designs, three of which were firefighting studies (Ives et al., 2016; Park et al., 2011; Colburn et al., M. Yung et al. 2017) and one studied police (Venkatappa and Vinutha Shankar, 2012). All four studies generally indicate positive relationships between fatigue and adverse health or performance outcomes. Firefighter studies investigated the effect of exercise-induced heat stress, firefighting gear, and physical fitness. Ives et al. (2016) measured the effect of exerciseinduced heat stress (wearing turnout coat, trousers, thermal hood, helmet, gloves and boots, and self-contained breathing apparatus) during three, 20-min bouts of treadmill walking. The authors found that brachial diameter increased after exercise-induced heat stress (mean pre-trial: 4.40 mm [SD = 0.12], post-trial: 4.62 mm [SD = 0.09]). Brachial artery blood flow significantly increased (mean pre-trial: 122 ml/min [SD = 15], post-trial: 548 ml/min [SD = 38]). Vascular endothelial function was significantly reduced after exercise-induced heat stress (pre-trial: 0.13 [SD = 0.02], post-trial: 0.06 [SD = 0.01]), which is related to reduced vascular reserve and increased coronary risk. Park et al. (2011) evaluated the potential link between wearing personal protective equipment (PPE) and gait (i.e., risk of tripping). While performing simulated firefighting activities in a burn tower, there was an increase in proportion of participants committing gait errors from baseline to post-activity ( Δ Baseline-Post = 48%). The mean number of errors increased from pre-activity to post-activity while wearing PPE ( Δ PrePost = 0.6). Colburn et al. (2017) found that firefighters with high physical fitness levels completed a functional balance test at a quicker self-selected pace than firefighters with lower fitness levels; the authors hypothesized that less physically fit firefighters may experience higher risk of falls if conditions require a fast work pace. In the single police M. Yung et al. study (Venkatappa and Vinutha Shankar, 2012), the physical environment (i.e., traffic noise) was related to sleep disturbance and subsequent psychosomatic symptoms. ( > 10 score on Epworth Sleepiness Scale) among shift workers (10%) than non-shift workers (9%). Shift workers had a high probability of sleep-related accidents (Odds Ratio = 2.24). Generally, studies demonstrate that a range of risk factors led to increasing fatigue, which subsequently led to a range of adverse shortand longer- term health and performance outcomes. In the paramedic/ EMS literature, risk factors represent non-specific paramedic/EMS work, work organization, and task factors, while all types of outcomes (performance, physical health, and wellness) were represented. For instance, Ock et al. (2011) examined the effect of chest compressions over a 5-min period on physical fatigue and resulting performance and quality of chest compressions. There was an increase in rating of perceived exertion, each minute, over the 5-min period ( Δ T1-T5 = 5.8), an increase in heart rate ( Δ T1-T5 = 15.8 bpm), and an increase in mean oxygen consumption (VO2 Δ T1-T5 = 0.10 l/min). The number of compressions (mean rate) over the 5-min period was maintained but there was a significant reduction in the percentage of correct compressions, defined as one with depth of 4 to 5 cm ( Δ T1-T5 = -50.8%). The authors found strong correlations between number of correct compressions and muscle strength at each increasing minute. In the firefighting literature, a range of risk factors (physical environment, PPE, personal capacity, work organization), increased physical fatigue, cognitive fatigue, or burnout, leading to an increased risk of a range of adverse health or performance outcomes (cardiovascular disorders, musculoskeletal disorders, accidents, poor mental health, and poor work performance). For instance, Smith et al. (2018) examined the relationships between work stress, burnout, and safe work practices. On a 5-point Likert scale, the work stress mean score was 1.73 (SD = 0.79) and was positively associated with burnout (5-point mean score: 1.65 [SD = 0.64]). Burnout negatively influenced three safety behaviour outcomes (all using 5-point Likert scales): safe work practices (mean = 4.39 [SD = 0.55]), wearing PPE (mean = 4.78 [SD = 0.41]), and reporting and communication (mean = 4.41 [SD = 0.60]). Finally, in the police literature, work organization, personal capacity, and physical environment risk factors were associated with cognitive fatigue, physical fatigue, and burnout, leading to increased accident risk, coronary/cardiovascular disease risk, psychosomatic symptoms, musculoskeletal disorders, and changes in job satisfaction and attitude towards work. For instance, Garbarino et al. (2001) measured the level of sleepiness of shift workers and non-shift workers, finding significantly higher levels of pathological sleepiness Three studies did not demonstrate a significant impact, or relationship, of fatigue on adverse outcomes. Sterud et al. (2007) measured burnout in paramedics, finding mean scores of 2.0 (SD = 0.6), 1.7 (SD = 0.6), and 1.3 (SD = 0.04), for emotional exhaustion, depersonalization, and low personal accomplishment, respectively, on a 5-point Likert Scale (Maslach Burnout Inventory). Almost 11% of paramedics within this study reported drinking to cope, and a mean score of 2.5 (SD = 1.1) and 1.0 (SD = 1.9) for alcohol consumption and alcohol problems, respectively (on a scale of 0 -8). Sterud et al. (2007) did not observe a significant relationship between burnout and alcohol use, nor strong relationships between burnout and alcohol-related problems and consumption. Sterud et al. (2007), however, did find that for paramedics who reported using alcohol to cope with feelings of distress and tension, they had higher levels of depersonalization and report more frequent alcohol consumption and problem drinking. Patterson et al. (2012) examined the relationship between sleep quality, fatigue, and selfreported safety outcomes in a sample of 511 US EMS workers. Fulltime workers, individuals who worked 6 -15 shifts monthly, personnel who worked 24-h shifts, and those who reported poor general health were often classified as ' fatigued ' . The odds ratio for injuries and error/ adverse events were 3.8 and 3.2 respectively for EMS personnel who reported 6 -15 shifts per month; the authors also observed higher odds, 4.0 and 2.9 respectively, for EMS personnel who reported more than 16 shifts per month. However, Patterson et al. (2012) did not find a relationship between shift duration (24 vs. < 12 h) and safety outcomes. The authors assert that the lack of association may be due to unmeasured workload levels during shifts, where the intensity of workload better predicts negative safety outcomes. Longer shifts with more opportunities to rest during downtime may mask potential relationships (Patterson et al., 2012). Yadav et al. (2016), in a study of police officers (as detailed above), did not find changes in blood pressure as a result of shift schedule.

## 4. Discussion
Fatigue remains a pervasive problem in first responder occupations. Although paramedic/EMS, firefighting, and police work have many M. Yung et al. differences between job tasks and work activities, these occupations have been grouped as first responders. When informing the scope of a Canadian first responder fatigue risk management standard, we found some similarities, particularly between paramedics/EMS and police, in the type of fatigue and risk factors. However, we found many differences between occupations that should be accounted for in a first responder fatigue risk management standard. When developing a fatigue risk management standard for first responders, the differences between occupations in fatigue and their impact on health and performance, all highlight the importance of managing fatigue of any type. Additionally, a first responder fatigue risk management standard should consider both workplace and personal/social/cultural risk factors to prevent both short- and longer-term outcomes. A cursory analysis of 403 papers revealed a slightly larger proportion of papers devoted to firefighters and fewer papers on paramedics/EMS. The number and distribution of articles based on our operationally defined fatigue types differed between occupations. Both paramedic/ EMS and police work had a higher distribution of cognitive types of fatigue, while firefighting work had a higher distribution of physical fatigue articles. Burnout appears to be relevant in paramedics/EMS and police work but less represented in the firefighting literature. According to studies on the severity of burnout among firefighters, reported cases of burnout in US, South Korea, France, and Kazakhstan all appear to be minimal (Jo et al., 2018; Vaulerin et al., 2016; Vinnikov et al., 2019; Sattler et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2018). We observed that paramedic/ EMS and police literature had similar distributions in the number of articles based on fatigue type and risk factors. Work organization and personal/social/cultural were primary fatigue risk factors in those two occupations. We also observed similar trends in the distribution of fatigue outcomes between police and firefighting; among all three occupations, outcomes were mainly physical health, including musculoskeletal disorders, cardiovascular disease, and acute injuries such as trips, slips, falls, and accidents. The observed differences between occupations is further complicated by potential differences of these occupations between countries, where tasks and activities performed in first responder occupations, and consequently work exposures, might vary cross-nationally. We found that the proportion of research based on fatigue type differed between studies focusing on Canadian first responders and studies from across the globe. Despite these differences, after examining fatigue type trends between occupations from Canadian sources, we arrive at a similar conclusion: the distributions by fatigue type differed between occupations. This examination provides a reminder that fatigue has been conceptualized in many ways and a standard for first responder organizations should consider all aspects. Categorizing by fatigue type within a standard might be useful in targeting appropriate controls and focus future research investigations. In a previous scoping review in production work, fatigue has been shown to be an important intermediary factor in the human factorquality linkage (Yung et al., 2020); up to 42% of quality deficits was explained by fatigue. In that study, physical fatigue (46% of papers) was a primary contributor to quality deficits. In this scoping review, we focused on a large breadth of potential outcome types. In all three occupations, burnout, cognitive fatigue, and physical fatigue were associated with adverse health and performance effects; these results highlight the importance of managing fatigue, of any type, to prevent short- and longer-term outcomes. Based on the number of linkages in the reviewed articles, cognitive fatigue appears to be more frequently linked to physical health (injury, accident risk, musculoskeletal disorders, cardiovascular disease), wellness and mental health (depression, anxiety, dissatisfaction), and work performance. Risk factors associated with an increase in cognitive fatigue include work organization (e.g., shift length, number of shifts, shift pattern, work stress), environmental stimuli (e.g., alarm response, excessive noise), and personal capacity (e. g., chronotype). Increasing fatigue generally led to adverse outcomes, however the variation of outcomes between categories, ranging from health to performance to wellness, and within each category, limits our ability to ascertain statistical relationships; more empirical studies are needed to improve the ability to predict the impact of fatigue in all three occupations. However, trends of these potential relationships between different risk factors, different fatigue types, and different outcomes support the results from our cursory analysis, recommending a first responder standard that considers a wide range of fatigue, risk factor, and outcome types. The standard development technical committee ' s decision on the scope of the first responder standard is not only contingent on the available peer-reviewed evidence but also the grey literature and key informant interviews. This approach will help inform the needs of first responders and their organizations and may assist in balancing the need for a more inclusive but focused and streamlined standard. There are several limitations of this research. First, this scoping review was limited to the selected keywords determined a priori with the consultation of a research librarian. A separate search dedicated to specific fatigue measures or tools or specific effects and outcomes might result in a different pool of published literature. Even within the current scope of literature, there is a possibility of missing some relevant literature not detected by keywords or systematic extraction criteria. However, given the considerable body of evidence, this common limitation would have unlikely affected the results. Second, we limit our search to articles written in the English language; articles from countries where English is not common language for academic publications may be underrepresented. Third, we excluded articles focused on single events (e. g., plane crashes, natural disasters, terrorist attacks, riots), those that did not focus on civilian first responders (e.g., wildland firefighters, military police, border police or patrol, correction officers, intelligence officers), and those that involved air ambulances. A targeted review should be dedicated to fatigue related to single events and to specialized occupations. Fourth, we assigned studies into fatigue types, based on the study description, measured fatigue responses, and the types of task attributed to fatigue. Different research groups might arrive to different interpretations, and therefore different categorizations.

## 5. Conclusion
We examined the extent, range, and nature of research activity to help us identify commonalities and differences between first responder occupations for the development of a national standard on first responder fatigue risk management. Fatigue in paramedic/EMS literature was least represented in 403 reviewed articles. The distribution of papers based on the type of fatigue, the categories of risk factors, and outcomes differed between occupations. Trends, however, indicate stronger similarities in the distribution of papers based on fatigue type and risk factors between paramedics/EMS and police. There were stronger similarities in the distribution of outcome types between police and firefighting; physical outcomes were the main focus in all three occupations. Burnout, cognitive fatigue, and physical fatigue were associated with adverse health and performance effects. When developing a first responder fatigue risk management standard, the differences between occupations in fatigue type and their associated health and performance consequences, all demonstrate the importance of managing multiple types of fatigue. We also recommend a first responder fatigue risk management standard to include both workplace and personal/social/cultural risk factors to prevent both short- and longer-term outcomes.