## Abstract
An occupational fatigue risk management standard is a timely initiative for thousands of first responders in Canada. Fatigue is a pervasive problem in paramedic, police, and firefighting occupations, where personnel experience significant levels of physical fatigue, cognitive task- and sleep-related fatigue, burnout, and emotional fatigue. A fatigue risk management standard is being developed and is informed from several sources, including a scoping review of first responder fatigue literature. The objective of this paper is to report on findings from the scoping review to (1) identify measures and tools used by researchers to assess fatigue-related risks, and (2) organize these measures and tools into adapted SOBANE risk management categories to facilitate their selection by organizations and occupational health and safety practitioners. We identified 60 unique measures and tools for the five different dimensions of fatigue across all first response occupations. Several fatigue measurements found in occupational fatigue literature and critical industry fatigue management were not reported; future research should investigate the development of predictive models and the reliability and validity of these tools in first response. The results of this scoping review provide a starting point for organizations to assess fatigue, of any dimension, but the psychometric properties of the identified measures and tools should be considered.

## 1. Introduction
Canada is developing an occupational fatigue risk management standard for first responders. First responder is a broad term encompassing paramedics or emergency service technicians (henceforth collectively referred to as paramedics ), firefighters, and police officers, who have all been naturally grouped in due part to similar risks to their health and safety, similar organizational rank structure, and possible concurrent employment across the three occupations (Stanley et al., 2016). A fatigue risk management standard is a timely initiative for over 27,000 paramedic members (Employment and Social Development Canada, 2020), 68,500 police officers (Statistics Canada, 2018), and approximately 26,000 career firefighters (National Fire Protection Association, 2018) in Canada. Fatigue is a pervasive problem in all three first responder occupations; high prevalence of sleep disorders, physical fatigue, burnout, and compassion fatigue have all been observed (e.g., Bentley and Levine, 2016; Young et al., 2014; Gershon et al., 2002; De la Fuente Solana et al., 2013). Fatigue is a multidimensional construct that is associated with a range of physical, psychological, socioeconomic, and environmental risk factors (Saito, 1999). There is no succinct and widely accepted definition, however, fatigue of any dimension (e.g., burnout, cognitive fatigue -both task- and sleep- related, physical fatigue, emotional fatigue, perceptual fatigue) is linked to worker health, wellbeing, and performance (Sluiter et al., 2003; Yung et al., 2020). The impact of fatigue on first responders may be immediate, including decrements in work performance and increased risk of committing errors and accidents (Ramey et al., 2019). Deficits in performance may compromise patient safety and care, such as medication errors and adverse events (Donnelly et al., 2020). Fatigue is also associated with longer-term outcomes, including * Corresponding author at: Canadian Institute for Safety, Wellness, & Performance, School of Business, Conestoga College Institute of Technology & Advanced Learning, 299 Doon Valley Drive, Kitchener, Ontario N2G 4M4, Canada. E-mail address: myung@conestogac.on.ca (M. Yung). M. Yung et al. risk of developing musculoskeletal disorders (Armstrong et al., 1993) and cardiovascular disease (Collins, 2009). Consequently, managing multiple dimensions of fatigue is essential to protect not only the health and safety of first responders but also the public they serve (Yung et al., 2021). A fatigue risk management system is a science-based, data driven process designed to improve organizational and personal outcomes (Lerman et al., 2012; Gander et al., 2011). Fatigue risk management is subjected to continuous improvement and can be incorporated into an organization ' s management system (Yazdani et al., 2018). Fatigue risk management systems have been developed for safety -critical sectors such as aviation, transport, military, and heavy industry (Lerman et al., 2012; Gander et al., 2011) but have not been extensively studied for first responder professions. In first responder work, personnel often face unpredictable physical and cognitive demands, tasks and activities may vary with each call, and they may work peripatetically (Coffey et al., 2016; Ramey et al., 2019); these job attributes may present challenges when applying an existing fatigue risk management system, intended for other safety -critical sectors, into first responder work. Additionally, fatigue risk management systems, irrespective of sector, often focus on managing sleep-related fatigue risks (e.g., Dawson & McCulloch, 2005), and to the best of our knowledge, exclude other fatigue dimensions including task-related physical and cognitive fatigue, and forms of perceptual, burnout, and emotional fatigue. Therefore, in developing a fatigue risk management standard for first responders, we focused on strategies often included as elements of a fatigue risk management system. This approach is similar to Querstret et al., (2020) in developing a fatigue risk management system for nurses, midwives, and other shift working healthcare staff. We report on a scoping review that broadly identified relevant research focused on fatigue in the first responder literature to help inform aspects of the risk assessment RACE model (i.e., recognize hazards, assess risks, implement controls, and evaluate the effectiveness of controls). The RACE model is an established process within a health and safety management system to manage workplace hazards; it is also an important element of a fatigue risk management system (Lerman et al., 2012). We focused on the RACE model as we also expected greater nuanced differences in RACE aspects between the first responder occupations to identify similar and contrasting hazard identification and risk assessment tools across paramedic, firefighting, and police literature. In this paper, our objective was to (1) identify the measures and tools used by researchers to assess fatigue risk, and (2) arrange these measures and tools into categories based on Malchaire ' s (2004) SOBANE risk management to facilitate selection of these measures by organizations and occupational health and safety (OHS) practitioners. This paper reports on findings from a larger scoping review [described in further detail in Yung et al. (2021)] to address these objectives. The scoping review and these objectives are a crucial initial step in supporting the development of a national fatigue risk management standard for first responders in Canada.

## 2. Methods
A scoping review is a systematic search of the peer-reviewed literature that allows us to itemize and summarize existing findings on a topic; examine how issues are approached by researchers; improve our understanding of how findings relate to each other and to the research question; and examine complex areas of research that have not been reviewed comprehensively (Arksey & O ' Malley, 2005; Poth & Ross, 2009; Levac et al., 2010). Although we do not assess the effectiveness or quality of the literature, it remains a transparent and systematic data selection and extraction approach (Arksey & O ' Malley, 2005; Levac et al., 2010). In our scoping review, we asked the following research questions with respect to all three first responder occupations (paramedics, firefighting, and police): - (1) What is the potential health, wellbeing, and performance outcomes of fatigue? - (2) What are the possible risk factors leading to these potential outcomes associated with fatigue? - (3) How can organizations and personnel measure or detect fatiguerelated hazards and assess the risk of an adverse outcome? - (4) What risk control strategies or interventions have been identified to reduce the effects of fatigue? We addressed questions 1 and 2 in a previous paper (Yung et al., 2021) finding that burnout, task- and sleep- related cognitive fatigue, and physical fatigue were associated with a range of adverse health and performance outcomes. These findings signify the importance of considering the multidimensionality of fatigue when managing fatiguerelated risks in first response. In this paper, we focus on question #3. Details of the scoping review methods has been previously described in Yung et al., 2021 and will be briefly described in this paper.

### 2.1. Identifying relevant studies
In consultation with a research librarian, we developed a list of search terms and their synonyms within three core concepts: person/ subject, task/discipline/subject area, and fatigue outcome or effect. We conducted our systematic search using three large databases: PubMed, Scopus, and Embase. These databases were chosen after consultation with a research librarian to ensure adequate and efficient coverage of our systematic search on the topic of multidimensional fatigue, which spans several disciplines. PubMed and Scopus databases are generally consistent with previous systematic reviews on first response work and workers (Patterson et al., 2018). We have also included Embase, as it has been previously recommended for systematic searches for biomedically oriented systematic reviews (Bramer et al. 2017). Our search involved data-specific subject headings (MeSH and Emtree terms), Boolean operator ' OR ' between search terms within each concept, and Boolean operator ' AND ' across concepts. We focused on articles published between January 1, 1990 and May 2, 2019; the first date coincides with the year that the US National Transportation Safety Board identified fatigue as an important occupational issue in the prevention of accidents, injuries, and fatalities (NTSB, 2020). We cross-referenced our search results with 10 articles, determined a priori (described in Yung et al., 2021), to ensure our search captured relevant studies. We excluded articles that were not written in English and those not published in peerreviewed journals.

### 2.2. Study selection, screening, and charting the data
Our scoping review consisted of two screening processes: (1) title and abstract screening and (2) full-text review and data extraction. In the first screen, articles were retained if they involved a first responder occupation and contained information that can inform elements of the risk assessment RACE model. We included synonyms of first responder job titles obtained from O*NET Online (https://www.onetonline.org) and the National Occupation Classification (NOC) system (https://www. noc.esdc.gc.ca). We excluded articles that focused on single events, such as plane crashes, on non-civilian first responders, such as wildland firefighters, on air ambulance work, and on non-worker fatigue, such as material fatigue. The first 60 titles and abstracts were independently screened by two reviewers, having a level of agreement of ' very good ' (Cohen ' s kappa; k = 0.859, z = 6.67, p < 0.05; Landis & Koch, 1977). The remaining articles were screened independently, and discrepant results were discussed until consensus was reached. Search results were imported into a publicly available online tool (Rayyan; Ouzzani et al., 2016). In the second screen, we reviewed full-text versions of the retained articles. Two reviewers extracted study information (e.g., authors, year of publication, journal, type of study, country of origin of study sample, M. Yung et al. objective, sample characteristics), the dimension of fatigue, detailed information on hazards and risk factors, fatigue measurement and risk assessment tools, outcomes, outcome measurement tools, and intervention and risk mitigation strategies. The first 20 articles were extracted by both reviewers who consulted one another throughout the second screening process. Our detailed second screen extraction tool, with definitions and examples, is found in Yung et al. (2021). papers for title and abstract review after removal of duplicates. An additional 1967 papers were removed after the title and abstract screen; full-text screening was completed on the remaining 507 papers, resulting in the exclusion of an additional 104 articles. A total of 403 papers were eligible for data extraction. Of the 403 papers, 92 articles focused on paramedics, 156 on firefighters, and 134 on police officers. Twentyone studies were not specific to a single first responder occupation but involved two or more first responder occupations (Yung et al., 2021).

### 2.2.1. Reported fatigue measures and risk assessment tools
We first identified measures and tools for each of the three first responder occupations and by fatigue dimension (burnout, physical, cognitive, emotional, perceptual). Both task-related, which involves decrements in human information processing due to mental workload, and sleep-related aspects were combined into a single dimension: cognitive fatigue. We then categorized measures and risk assessment tools based on the SOBANE risk management strategy, which is comprised of four levels of measurement and evaluation: Screening, Observation, Analysis, and Expertise (Malchaire, 2004). Categorizing by SOBANE affords us to group measures and tools based on practical elements (i.e., cost, feasibility, required personnel resources or background knowledge and training to use or implement) and their effectiveness (i.e., sensitivity or specificity, coverage) [Malchaire, 2004]. Categorization of measures and tools using SOBANE or adapted SOBANE-like strategies have been used in practice, including a toolkit of risk assessment methods for musculoskeletal disorders (CRE-MSD, 2020). For our purpose of categorizing fatigue measures and risk assessment tools, we adapted the SOBANE strategy and defined the SOBANE-like categories as the following: Screening refers to tools that can quickly identify fatigue-related hazards; these tools are simple to use, require little cost, can be used by workers or managers with limited knowledge in OHS but with knowledge of the work situation, and offer extensive coverage of workers, tasks, or jobs. These tools might include checklists with yes/no or checkbox style responses and help promote discussion of hazards and risks among stakeholders within a workplace. Observation refers to measures or tools that provide a higher level of detailed screening and may serve as a simple risk assessment. These tools might be checklists, containing yes/no or multiple-choice style responses, and can be used to help assess the level of risk or help prioritize hazards. Although observation is implied as the primary method to collect and analyze data, we also grouped self-reported tools that serve as simple risk assessment into this category. Analysis refers to measures or tools that assess specific exposures by comparing the output to a threshold to determine the level of risk. These methods or tools can be used for detailed analysis and can be used for comparing situations before and after implementing a risk control. These tools often require OHS practitioners who have the necessary qualification and knowledge. These tools may require simple measurements as input variables but may also be self-reported instruments with known numerical threshold cut-offs. Expertise requires specialized knowledge and measurement equipment for complex situations. These tools may have higher specificity and sensitivity than the preceding categories, but at the expense of higher cost to implement and lower coverage of workers, tasks, or jobs. Four co-authors of this article, with expertise in occupational fatigue and risk assessment, two of which are certified safety and ergonomics professionals, independently assigned each unique fatigue measure and risk assessment tool into categories based on the SOBANE-like structure. Assignments were aided by literature on each measure or tool. Inconsistent assignments between co-authors were then discussed as a group until consensus was reached.

## 3. Results
We collected 3671 papers from our keyword search, leaving 2474

### 3.1. Fatigue measures or risk assessment tools by first responder occupation
A total of 47 unique papers involved a measurement of fatigue or an assessment of risk in paramedic research. Forty-two paramedic-focused papers measured a single dimension of fatigue and five papers measured two fatigue dimensions. Five of the 47 papers focused on both paramedics and firefighters. Treating multiple- fatigue dimension papers as individual studies by fatigue dimension and combined with the 42 singlefatigue dimension papers (therefore a total of 52 studies by fatigue dimension), 19 measured burnout, 14 involved a measure of cognitive fatigue, 17 measured physical fatigue, and 2 measured emotional fatigue. Thirty-seven of the 52 studies by fatigue dimension utilized multiple measures or risk assessment tools while the remaining reported a single measure. After compiling the reported fatigue measures or risk assessment tools by fatigue dimension, we found 23 studies describing a single fatigue measure or risk assessment tool for burnout, 33 studies for cognitive fatigue, 39 studies for physical fatigue, and 2 studies for emotional fatigue (Supplement, Table 1). Seventy-four unique papers focused on firefighter fatigue. Eight papers reported on two dimensions of fatigue and the remaining 66 papers involved a single dimension of fatigue. Five papers were focused on both firefighters and paramedics. Individual studies , considering both single and multiple fatigue dimensions, were distributed as follows: burnout (7 studies ), cognitive (19 studies ), physical (53 studies ), and emotional fatigue (3 studies ). Only 11 of the 82 studies utilized a single measure in its experimental protocol. After counting the number of studies that represent a single fatigue measure or risk assessment tool for each fatigue dimension, we found 5 burnout, 38 cognitive fatigue, 125 physical fatigue, and 3 emotional fatigue studies (Supplement, Table 2). There were 75 papers describing a fatigue measure or risk assessment in the police fatigue literature. Sixty-five papers reported a single dimension of fatigue, 9 papers reported on 2 dimensions, and 1 paper reported on all 3 dimensions. After re-categorizing single- and multiplefatigue dimension papers as individual studies , 24 focused on burnout, 44 on cognitive fatigue, 15 on physical fatigue, 2 on emotional fatigue, and 1 on perceptual fatigue. A single measure of fatigue was reported in 22 of the 86 studies . There was total of 109 reported fatigue measurement or risk assessment tools across 86 studies , distributed as 32 in burnout studies , 50 in cognitive fatigue, 23 in physical fatigue, 2 in emotional, and 1 in perceptual (Supplement, Table 3). When analyzing the frequency of reported measures and tools by fatigue dimension, burnout was measured frequently using psychological inventories, surveys, and questionnaires, such as Maslach Burnout Inventory (Fig. 1). Heart rate measures (frequency and heart rate variability) and surveys, scales, and questionnaires (e.g., Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index, non-specific questionnaires) were common measures of cognitive fatigue and sleep-related fatigue (Fig. 2). Heart rate frequency and variability, perceived exertion, respiratory measures, and kinematics were frequently used in studies to detect or assess physical fatigue (Fig. 3). Finally, the Professional Quality of Life Scale was frequently used, across all three first responder occupations, when measuring and assessing emotional fatigue (Fig. 4). M. Yung et al.

### 3.2 Grouping fatigue measures and risk assessment tools into SOBANELike categories
We then identified all fatigue measures and risk assessment tools from across all three first responder occupations and removed instruments that were developed for the purpose of a particular study or lacked detailed information to reproduce (i.e., ' Other non-specific questionnaires ' ). We also removed duplicate fatigue measures or risk assessment tools. Six measures were used to study more than one dimension of fatigue. Heart rate (frequency, heart rate variability), body temperature (oral, core, skin), task performance (e.g., completion time), observations and interviews, and visual analog scales were used in studies that assessed cognitive or physical fatigue. One measure was reported for both burnout and emotional fatigue: the Professional Quality of Life Scale. There was a total of 60 measures and tools that were unique across all three first responder occupations and dimensions of fatigue. focused on strategies included as elements of a fatigue risk management system, as there are no existing fatigue risk management systems for first response, and current systems for other critical industries may not be applicable to paramedics, police, and firefighters. Additionally, the focus of fatigue risk management is traditionally bestowed on sleeprelated fatigue; however, fatigue, both task-related and sleep-related, as well as its different dimensions (burnout, cognitive, physical, emotional, perceptual), are highly prevalent and associated with adverse health and performance effects (Yung et al., 2021). Fatigue measurement, by identifying measures and tools, is a component of fatigue risk management, satisfying components of recognizing hazards, assessing risk, and evaluating effectiveness of controls within the risk assessment RACE model. The 60 measures and tools were then grouped into SOBANE-like categories. First, measures and tools were grouped by their general characteristics (i.e., assessment scales and validated surveys, instrumentation, neuropsychological assessment and psychomotor tests, observations and self-report, physiological biomarkers, physiological monitoring wearable technologies). Second, these groupings were then arranged into the SOBANE-like categories for burnout, physical fatigue, cognitive fatigue, perceptual fatigue, and emotional fatigue (Table 1).

## 4. Discussion
An evidence-informed, consensus-based fatigue risk management standard for first responders is currently under development in Canada. The standard development technical committee ' s decision on the scope and elements of the fatigue risk management standard will be informed by an environmental scan of grey literature and semi-structured key informant interviews, as well as a systematic scoping review of peerreviewed literature, including findings presented in this paper. We As expected, we identified a large diverse set of reported tools and measurements to detect and assess the risk of fatigue, possibly in due part to the many definitions, theories, specific fatigue processes, and manifestations of fatigue. In a workshop of experts from multiple perspectives and disciplines, 57 measures and tools for task-related occupational fatigue were identified (Yung, 2016). The selection of valid, reliable, and practical tools has been an ongoing challenge and has been a focus in occupational fatigue research. For instance, researchers have attempted to identify the sensitivity and reliability of workplace usable cognitive and physical fatigue measures (Sood et al, 2007; Yung & Wells (2017a)); identify or develop measures to assess workplace fatigue over a workday and multiple workdays (Geiger-Brown et al., 2012; Grech et al., 2009; Maman et al., 2017; Yung et al., 2014); understand the pattern of fatigue development and contributions from central and peripheral sites in physical fatigue (Burnley et al., 2012; Yung & Wells, 2017b); and identify measures related to health outcomes and performance (Barker & Nussbaum, 2011; Yung et al., 2017c). Since fatigue is task dependent (Enoka & Stuart, 1992), multiple complementary measures, compared to collecting fatigue information from a single measure, provides a comprehensive picture of fatigue development (Bosch et al., 2007). These previous studies and many others suggest that when measuring fatigue among individual workers, a battery of measures M. Yung et al. Cognitive Fatigue ToolslMeasures reflecting multiple mechanisms, for instance central and peripheral processes for physical fatigue, should be strongly considered. In this scoping review, 73% of paramedic studies, 86% of firefighting studies, and 74% of police studies, reported using multiple measures or fatigue risk assessment tools, and very few studies (11%) measured multiple dimensions of fatigue. In this study, 60 unique fatigue measures and tools were identified for the five different dimensions of fatigue across all first response occupations. We grouped the reported measures and tools by an adapted SOBANE risk assessment strategy for organizations to select measures and tools based on their practical elements, required resources, and coverage of assessment. Categorization into SOBANE or SOBANE-like risk assessment serves several purposes, such as identifying measures and tools that can be used by workplace managers and OHS practitioners at all stages of the standard risk management cycle; identifying measures and tools that enable workers to be active participants in the risk assessment and control process; and identifying measures and tools that are applicable for service providers of all sizes (Yazdani et al., 2018; Oakman & Macdonald, 2019). Additionally, categorization by SOBANE or SOBANE-like groupings is aligned with the World Health Organization ' s (WHO) framework for the development of toolkits for managing work-related risks (WHO, 2009), which allows for integration into existing safety management systems or other similar organizational frameworks. An alternative framework is the hierarchical fatigue-risk trajectory model, which is a recognized approach to guide organizations in implementing appropriate control mechanisms at each point in the theoretical error trajectory (Dawson & McCulloch, 2005). At each of the four levels, fatigue risk assessment may help inform organizational decision-making; however, these decisions and implemented controls have largely relied exclusively on sleep-related risk assessment and data, and do not account for the multidimensional nature of fatigue (Steege & Pinekenstein, 2016). Consequently, new conceptual models have been developed to effectively monitor multidimensional demands in a multilevel work system, for example in nursing (Steege & Pinekenstein, 2016). For the purpose of considering the different demands and risks for multiple dimensions of fatigue, and the level of knowledge, expertise, cost, and time resources when using measures and tools, we considered the SOBANE risk assessment strategy as an established framework that may be translated across first responder occupations and organizations. Measures and tools identified for critical industry fatigue risk management and within the occupational fatigue literature may not have been reported in the reviewed first responder fatigue studies. These include, but are not limited to, direct measurements (e.g., oculomotor behaviour, muscle mechanomyography and muscle stiffness response, electrodermal response, tremor and steadiness, pressure pain threshold), predictive models (e.g., demands analysis and efficiency or productivity models, or discrete event simulation models), and fatigue survey instruments (e.g., Swedish Occupational Fatigue Inventory). Many of these measures and tools have reported data on their reliability and validity but have not yet been developed, employed, or studied within the first response population. Future research should be devoted towards the development of first responder specific predictive fatigue models (both physical, cognitive, and sleep-related), as well as the evaluation of alternative measures and tools, not reported in the screened literature, but have shown value in other sectors. We did not focus on the psychometric properties of reported measures and tools identified through this review as it was beyond the scope M. Yung et al. M. Yung et al. Table 1 Fatigue Measures and Risk Assessment Tools Grouped by SOBANE-Like Risk Assessment Categories. | Grouping | General Characteristic Fatigue | Fatigue Risk Assessment Instrument or Tool | | | | |----------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------| | Screening | Observation and Self-Report Physical | • Observations (Signs and Symptoms) • Interviews | • Basic Surveys • Task Completion Time | • Basic Surveys • Task Completion Time | | | | Cognitive • Observations (Signs and Symptoms) | | • Task Completion Time | • Task Completion Time | | | | • | Stanford Sleepiness Scale | | | | | | Software Cognitive Fatigue Assessment Scales and Validated Surveys Burnout | • Biomathematical Models • Oldenburg Burnout Inventory (OLBI) | • Copenhagen Burnout Inventory • Perceived Stress Scale | • Copenhagen Burnout Inventory • Perceived Stress Scale | | | Observation | • Bergen Burnout Inventory • Work-Related Strain Inventory Cognitive | • Sleep Diary | • Staff Burnout Scale • Demand-Induced Strain | • Staff Burnout Scale • Demand-Induced Strain | | | | • Sleep Fatigue and Alertness • Health and Safety Executive Stress | Behavior Survey • Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index | Compensation Questionnaire (DISQ) • NASA Task Load Index • Samn-Perelli Fatigue Checklist • Karolinska Sleepiness Scale • Standard Shiftwork Index | Compensation Questionnaire (DISQ) • NASA Task Load Index • Samn-Perelli Fatigue Checklist • Karolinska Sleepiness Scale • Standard Shiftwork Index | | | | • Chalder Fatigue Questionnaire | Questionnaire • Occupational Fatigue Exhaustion Recovery (OFER) Scale | | | | | | • Visual Analog Scale | | • Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI) | • Multidimensional Fatigue Inventory (MFI) | | | | • Borg ' s Rating of Perceived Exertion | or Perceived | • Visual Analog Scale | • Visual Analog Scale | | | | Physical | Force Scale | Compassion Fatigue Short Scale | Compassion Fatigue Short Scale | | | | • Cognitive | • Job Stress Scale • Epworth Sleepiness Scale • Berlin Questionnaire | | • Professional Quality of Life Scale • Beck Depression Inventory | | | | Emotional • Professional Quality of Life Scale | | | | | | | | • | • Digit Symbol Substitution | • Digit Symbol Substitution | | | | Neuropsychological Assessment and Cognitive | Single Letter Cancellation Test | Test | Test | | | | Psychomotor Tests Advanced Fatigue Instrumentation Cognitive | | | • Grip Strength | | | Expert | • Polysomnography • Kinetics or Forces/Weights • Kinematics (e.g., Postural Sway, Posture Advanced Neuropsychological Assessment Cognitive | • Psychomotor Vigilance Task • Simple/Choice Reaction Time Test • Critical Flicker Fusion Frequency | • Fluid Loss (Sweat Rate) • Physiological Strain Index Perceptual Strain Index • N-Back Test | • Fluid Loss (Sweat Rate) • Physiological Strain Index Perceptual Strain Index • N-Back Test | | | | and Psychomotor Tests | | | | | | | | • Eye-Hand Skill Test/Dexterity/Purdue Pegboard | | | | | | | Test/Fine Motor Coordination Tests Fine Motor Coordination Tests Critical Flicker Fusion Frequency | and | and | | | | Physical | | | | | | | | | • Visual Object Leaning Test | • Visual Object Leaning Test | | | | | | (VOLT) • Stroop-Colour Word Tasks | (VOLT) • Stroop-Colour Word Tasks | | | | Perceptual | Salivary Test (Melatonin) | | | | | | | | • Cortisol Awakening | • Cortisol Awakening | | | | | Blood Sampling | | | | | | • Physiological Biomarkers Cognitive | | | | | | | • | | Response | Response | | | | | Heart Rate (Frequency, Heart Body Temperature (oral, skin, | | | | | | | | • Wrist Actigraph | • Wrist Actigraph | | | | | Heart Rate (Frequency, Heart | • Sleep and Activity Trackers | • Sleep and Activity Trackers | | | | • | | | | | | | | | • Wrist Actigraph and Activity | • Wrist Actigraph and Activity | | | | • • Rate | core) Rate Body Temperature (oral, skin, core) | | | | | | | | • Task Analysis | • Task Analysis | | | | • | | | | | | | | Awareness (SART, SAGAT, Eye Tracking) | | | | | | • | | | | | | | | • | | | | | | | | Variability) | Variability) | | | | | | Trackers | Trackers | | | | • Situational | • Situational | • Situational | • Situational | • Situational | | Tracking and | Tracking and | Tracking and | Tracking and | Tracking and | Tracking and | | Monitoring Systems Perceptual | Monitoring Systems Perceptual | Monitoring Systems Perceptual | Monitoring Systems Perceptual | Monitoring Systems Perceptual | Monitoring Systems Perceptual | | Physical Physical | Physical Physical | Physical Physical | Physical Physical | Physical Physical | Physical Physical | | | | Variability) | Variability) | Variability) | | | Physiological Monitoring Wearables Cognitive | Physiological Monitoring Wearables Cognitive | Physiological Monitoring Wearables Cognitive | Physiological Monitoring Wearables Cognitive | Physiological Monitoring Wearables Cognitive | Physiological Monitoring Wearables Cognitive | | Physical | Physical | Physical | Physical | Physical | Physical | of our research questions. There are few systematic reviews that have examined these criteria for sleep-related fatigue (Shahid et al., 2010), burnout (Shoman et al., 2021), and narrative reviews on physical fatigue measurements (V ø llestad, 1997). For instance, Shahid et al. (2010) reviewed the psychometric properties of three of the self-reported rating instruments identified in our scoping review: Stanford Sleepiness Scale, Karolinska Sleepiness Scale, and Epworth Sleepiness Scale. In the case of the Epworth Sleepiness Scale, reviewed studies indicate high test -retest reliability (r = 0.822), a high level of internal consistency ( α = 0.88), and was a more discriminative test on average sleep propensity compared to multiple sleep latency test and maintenance of wakefulness test (Shahid et al., 2010). There are even fewer systematic reviews on the reliability and validity of fatigue and sleepiness survey instruments specific to first response occupations, such as paramedic work (Patterson et al., 2018b). In their review, Patterson et al (2018b) found limited evidence for 14 different fatigue-related survey instruments to assess fatigue and/or sleepiness among paramedics. The results of this scoping review, however, provide a starting point for first response organizations to assess fatigue, of any dimension, but the selection of measures should consider their psychometric properties and its appropriateness for first response based on available information. We encourage future systematic reviews on the psychometric properties of self-reported instruments and the reliability and validity of objective measures across all dimensions of fatigue, specific to occupation. There are limitations of this research. First, the identification of fatigue measures and tools were obtained through a larger scoping review pertaining to several elements of the risk assessment RACE model; a separate search dedicated to specific fatigue measures or tools and specific effects or outcomes might result in a different pool of published literature. There remains a possibility of having missed some relevant articles not detected by keywords or systematic extraction criteria. This limitation, however, is unlikely to have affected our results, given the considerable body of evidence. Second, we excluded articles that were focused on single events (e.g., terrorist attacks, riots, disasters), air ambulance work, and non-civilian first responder occupations (e.g., military police). Therefore, the results of our scoping review may not be generalizable to these events and specialized occupations. Third, the authors of this paper grouped fatigue measures and tools into SOBANElike categories based on a priori definitions for each level (screening, observation, analysis, and expertise). We made alterations to M. Yung et al. Malchaire ' s (2004) original definitions to avoid possible clustering of tools into a single level. For instance, we considered survey instruments with thresholds and cut-off scores, to determine a level of risk, as Analysis measures or tools; otherwise, these survey instruments may have been categorized as Observation based on the original SOBANE definitions. Fourth, in assigning fatigue measures and tools into the SOBANE-like risk assessment framework, literature on the characteristics, requirements, application, and interpretation of measures and tools informed our decisions. However, other research groups might arrive to different interpretations and therefore different categorizations.

## 5. Conclusion
Fatigue, of any dimension, is prevalent in first responder work, signifying the importance of managing multiple dimensions of fatigue. We conducted a scoping review to identify reported fatigue and fatiguerelated risk assessment measures and tools, across multiple fatigue dimensions, reported in first responder fatigue studies. These measures and tools were then organized into an established risk assessment framework based on the level of organizational resources (e.g., cost and time) and knowledge and expertise. While our results might help organizations select fatigue measures and tools, their psychometric properties and suitability for first response should be considered. Our scoping review results may help inform methods of fatigue risk assessment, an important element of a fatigue risk management system, in which an occupational standard for first responders is under development in Canada.